hi there is all okWhile a number of the most important reform movements of the late 19th and early 20th centuries grew out of efforts to combat the negative effects of industrialization, the main focus of their efforts was not the impact of the Industrial Revolution on the natural environment. Although some reformers, such as Theodore Roosevelt and Gifford Pinchot, were deeply worried about the consequences of economic development on the natural environment, the most influential, most effective reformers were primarily concerned with the impact of the rise of big business on small businesses, industrial workers, and consumers, and with corruption in government that reformers believed resulted from the economic power of large corporations.

Farmers were upset at what they regarded as arbitrary and excessive railroad rates and abuses such as rebates to big business like Standard Oil. These farmers were among the first and most outspoken advocates of reform in the late 19th century. Pressure from the Farmers’ Alliances convinced Congress to pass and President Cleveland to sign the Interstate Commerce Act of 1887, a piece of legislation designed to regulate railroad rates and prohibit corrupt practices such as rebates. By 1890, these Farmers’ Alliances had entered politics in a number of Southern and Midwestern states and succeeded in pressuring Congress to pass the Sherman Antitrust Act, outlawing all “combinations in restraint of trade.” By 1892, a national People’s Party had been organized, nominating a third-party presidential candidate and electing several members of Congress. The Populist movement, a reform movement attempting to combat the negative effects of industrialization and the rise of big business, was now in full swing.

Beginning at the state level and with strong support in many urban areas, a new progressive movement reached the national level during the first years of the 20th century. Supported by President Theodore Roosevelt, progressive reformers, like the Populists, sought to strengthen railroad regulation and both enforce and further strengthen the antitrust laws. In 1902, President Roosevelt not only forced mine owners to submit to arbitration to settle a nationwide coal strike, he also asked his attorney general to file an antitrust suit against the Northern Securities Company, a large railroad holding company. After the Supreme Court upheld a lower court decision to break up the Northern Securities Company in 1904, Roosevelt went on to strengthen the Interstate Commerce Commission’s ability to regulate railroad rates by pushing the Hepburn Act through Congress in 1906. A few years later, another progressive reformer, Woodrow Wilson, succeeded to the presidency, and he managed to further strengthen the antitrust laws by pushing the Clayton Antitrust Act through Congress in 1914.

While railroad regulation and antitrust actions attracted the most attention of reformers during the period 1880–1920, some efforts were made by reformers to mitigate the effects of industrialization and commercial expansion on the natural environment. President Roosevelt used his executive authority to put thousands of acres of public lands aside for national parks, saving them from commercial exploitation. In 1908, he convened a conservation conference at the White House in an effort to further mitigate the damage that mining and manufacturing were doing to the natural environment, especially in the West. President Roosevelt also pushed for the establishment of the forest service and appointed a conservation-minded ally, Gifford Pinchot, to head that agency. Finally, even after retiring from office, Roosevelt supported Pinchot in his efforts to prevent President Taft’s secretary of the interior, Richard Ballinger, from opening additional public lands to commercial exploitation.

Thus, both the populist and progressive movements sought to combat the negative effects of industrialization and economic expansion by focusing primarily on railroad regulation and the strengthening and enforcement of antitrust legislation. Nevertheless, some progressive reformers like Theodore Roosevelt and Gifford Pinchot did pay significant attention to preventing further damage to the natural environment and helped to found the modern conservation movement.
Both the so-called “Market Revolution” and the most influential reform movements of the period 1815–1860 took place throughout the United States, not just in New England, and at least some leading merchants and industrialists were enthusiastic supporters of reform. It is true that New England was home to a substantial number of reformers, especially several important leaders of the abolitionist movement, such as William

Lloyd Garrison and Wendell Phillips. It is also true that the two most influential reform movements, the temperance and abolitionist movements, were not primarily concerned with the effects of the Market Revolution. Yet the spread of the Market Revolution did significantly increase the number of employers who supported the temperance movement, if for no other reason than to try to ensure that their employees came to work sober and ready to do their jobs.

Although there were numerous reform movements founded during the period 1815– 1860, from the New York Female Moral Reform Society to the Lowell Female Labor Reform Association to the Woman’s suffrage movement, the two largest and most influential reform movements were the temperance movement, initiated by the American Temperance Society, and the abolitionist movement, first organized effectively in the American Anti-Slavery Society. Both the American Temperance Society and the New England Anti-Slavery Society, the precursor of the American Anti-Slavery Society, began in New England. The American Anti-Slavery Society was founded in Philadelphia. These organizations quickly spread throughout the country, opening hundreds of local chapters. Among the most important, most dedicated leaders of the abolitionist movement were the New York brothers Arthur and Lewis Tappan, wealthy merchants who gave strong financial support to the anti-slavery movement.

While some reformers such as the Tappan brothers and Robert Owen, the founder of a utopian community at New Lanark, Indiana, were successful merchants and industrialists, a much larger number of prominent reformers, including most of the leaders of the temperance and abolitionist movements, were motivated primarily by their religious beliefs. This was certainly true of Reverend Lyman Beecher, one of the founders of the American Temperance Society and a leading abolitionist; Charles Grandison Finney, an evangelist
and leading anti-slavery advocate; and Finney’s disciple, Theodore Dwight Weld, a leading abolitionist and husband of prominent female anti-slavery speaker, Angelina Grimke. And, of these four famous reformers, only Beecher was a New Englander.

Thus, although New England was home to a substantial number of reformers during the antebellum period, it was only one of a number of centers of reform. Like the so-called Market Revolution, reform movements flourished throughout the nation during these years, and while some merchants and industrialists were leading reformers, the largest number of prominent reformers appear to have been motivated by religious beliefs rather than a desire to combat any of the evils attributed by contemporaries to the Market Revolution.